October 2013 updates to Magnum
##############################

:date: 2013-10-30 18:50
:modified: 2018-02-18
:archived: True
:alias: /blog/announcements/october-2013-updates/
:category: Announcements
:tags: C++, CMake, Corrade, OpenGL, WebGL, Emscripten
:summary: Summary of changes during the first two months after public release.
    Two new ports, usability improvements, OpenGL limit queries and
    introduction of API deprecation.

.. note-success:: Content care: May 06, 2018

    Since NaCl support is
    `no longer available <{filename}/blog/announcements/webassembly-support-and-more.rst>`_,
    links to NaCl web demos were replaced with Emscripten demos. Other than
    that, the functionality is the same.

    With the 2018.02 release the versioning scheme and tag naming changed from
    "Month Year snapshot" and ``snapshot-YYYY-MM`` to simply "YYYY.MM" and
    ``vYYYY.MM``. All tags and links in the article were updated to follow the
    new scheme.

    Detailed changelogs are now part of the documentation. Code snippets are
    kept in the original form for archival purposes.

The version 2013.10 is available under the ``v2013.10`` tag in
:gh:`Corrade <mosra/corrade^v2013.10>`, :gh:`Magnum <mosra/magnum^v2013.10>`,
:gh:`Magnum Plugins <mosra/magnum-plugins^v2013.10>` and
:gh:`Magnum Integration <mosra/magnum-integration^v2013.10>` GitHub
repositories. This article will describe the most important changes, for
detailed list follow the changelog links at the end of this announcement.

`API deprecation and backwards compatibility`_
==============================================

Because the library is constantly evolving, some APIs will be replaced with
faster, safer or more intuitive versions from time to time. The old API is then
marked as deprecated and scheduled for removal in some future release. The
libraries are source compatible, but not binary compatible, as full binary
compatibility might impose unwanted performance issues, which is usually not
wanted for high-performance graphics frameworks.

Both Corrade and Magnum libraries are by default built with deprecated APIs
included. However, to make your code future-proof and more robust, you should
disable building of deprecated APIs by disabling ``BUILD_DEPRECATED`` CMake
option. Information about whether given library is built with deprecated APIs
or not is exposed via :dox:`CORRADE_BUILD_DEPRECATED` or
:dox:`MAGNUM_BUILD_DEPRECATED` CMake variable and also preprocessor definition.
Please note that the deprecated APIs will be periodically removed after some
time (on which I have yet to decide, but the deprecation period will be not
shorter than six months).

The documentation now also contains list of deprecated APIs in both
:dox:`Corrade <Corrade::deprecated>` and :dox:`Magnum <Corrade::deprecated>`,
information about whether :dox:`CORRADE_BUILD_DEPRECATED` and
:dox:`MAGNUM_BUILD_DEPRECATED` is enabled or not is now also printed in
:dox:`magnum-info <magnum-gl-info>`.

`Complete changelog`_
=====================

You can find a detailed list of changes in version 2013.10 in the
documentation:

-   :dox:`Changes in Corrade 2013.10 <corrade-changelog-2013-10>`
-   :dox:`Changes in Magnum 2013.10 <changelog-2013-10>`
-   :dox:`Changes in Magnum Plugins 2013.10 <changelog-plugins-2013-10>`
-   :dox:`Changes in Magnum Integration 2013.10 <changelog-integration-2013-10>`
