January 2014 updates to Magnum
##############################

:date: 2014-01-21
:modified: 2018-02-18
:alias: /blog/announcements/january-2014-updates/
:archived: True
:category: Announcements
:tags: C++, CMake, Corrade, OpenGL, Emscripten, NaCl
:summary: Since the previous October snapshot Magnum gained Visual Studio port,
    font conversion utility, improved text rendering along with example
    application, support for OpenGL debug output, documentation updates, better
    test coverage and many more usability improvements and fixes.

.. role:: cpp(code)
    :language: c++
.. role:: label-flat-info
    :class: m-label m-flat m-info
.. role:: label-flat-success
    :class: m-label m-flat m-success

.. note-success:: Content care: May 06, 2018

    Since NaCl support is
    `no longer available <{filename}/blog/announcements/webassembly-support-and-more.rst>`_,
    links to NaCl web demos were replaced with Emscripten demos. Other than
    that, the functionality is the same.

    With the 2018.02 release the versioning scheme and tag naming changed from
    "Month Year snapshot" and ``snapshot-YYYY-MM`` to simply "YYYY.MM" and
    ``vYYYY.MM``. All tags and links in the article were updated to follow the
    new scheme, except for tags in the compatibility branch, which are kept in
    their original form for archival purposes.

    Detailed changelogs are now part of the documentation. Code snippets are
    kept in the original form for archival purposes.

The version 2014.01 is available under the ``v2014.01`` tag in
:gh:`Corrade <mosra/corrade^v2014.01>`, :gh:`Magnum <mosra/magnum^v2014.01>`,
:gh:`Magnum Plugins <mosra/magnum-plugins^v2014.01>` and
:gh:`Magnum Integration <mosra/magnum-integration^v2014.01>` GitHub
repositories. This article will describe the most important changes, for
detailed list follow the changelog links at the end of this announcement.

For compatibility branch there is the ``snapshot-2014-01-compatibility`` tag in
:gh:`Corrade <mosra/corrade^snapshot-2014-01-compatibility>`,
:gh:`Magnum <mosra/magnum^snapshot-2014-01-compatibility>` and
:gh:`Magnum Plugins <mosra/magnum-plugins^snapshot-2014-01-compatibility>`
repositories.

`Google Groups discussion`_
===========================

You can now ask for help, share your work or participiate in development at the
`new Google Groups forum <https://groups.google.com/forum/#!forum/magnum-engine>`_.
The group is open to everyone, you just need Google account to post. In my
opinion this is better than requiring everyone to create new account on some
self-hosted forum.

`New text rendering example`_
=============================

I added text rendering example to showcase new features such as text alignment
and multi-line text, in addition to already existing distance-field rendering
capabilities. See `showcase page <{filename}/showcase.rst>`_ for live
application running on both Emscripten and Native Client. I also added live
Textured Triangle example.

.. container:: m-row

    .. container:: m-col-m-6

        .. include:: ../../showcase-figures.rst.in
            :start-after: [textured-triangle]
            :end-before: [/textured-triangle]

    .. container:: m-col-m-6

        .. include:: ../../showcase-figures.rst.in
            :start-after: [text]
            :end-before: [/text]

`Using absolute includes by default`_
=====================================

All projects were switched to use absolute includes by default, i.e. headers
are included this way:

.. code:: c++

    #include <Magnum/Math/Vector3.h>

rather than this way:

.. code:: c++

    #include <Math/Vector3.h>

This solves many problems with filename collisions (namely with Visual Studio
compiler, Doxygen and possibly elsewhere), see :gh:`mosra/magnum#36` for more
information. As this is a very drastic change, you may need to recreate your
build directories and update at least ``FindCorrade.cmake`` and
``FindMagnum.cmake`` CMake modules with new ones from ``modules/`` subdirectory
in :gh:`Corrade <mosra/corrade/tree/master/modules>` and
:gh:`Magnum <mosra/magnum/tree/master/modules>` repositories (and possibly also
other ones).

If you are building with deprecated features enabled (``BUILD_DEPRECATED``
CMake parameter in *both* Corrade and Magnum), you can still use the old
non-absolute includes, but you are encouraged to switch to absolute ones.

`Visual Studio 2013 support`_
=============================

This release is the first one with experimental Visual Studio 2013 support.
Because the compiler still lacks some required features (:cpp:`constexpr` and
:cpp:`noexcept` keywords) and has some serious bugs in C++11 implementation,
the support is provided only through ``compatibility`` branch. The port
involves some ugly hacks and workarounds which can't be put in ``master``,
hopefully the next MSVC release will make my life easier. Snapshot of
``compatibility`` branch with MSVC 2013 support is available under
``snapshot-2014-01-compatibility`` tag in
:gh:`Corrade <mosra/corrade^snapshot-2014-01-compatibility>` and
:gh:`Magnum <mosra/magnum^snapshot-2014-01-compatibility>` GitHub repositories.
The compatibility branch doesn't contain anything new except workarounds for
said compilers.

`Complete changelog`_
=====================

You can find a detailed list of changes in version 2014.01 in the
documentation:

-   :dox:`Changes in Corrade 2014.01 <corrade-changelog-2014-01>`
-   :dox:`Changes in Magnum 2014.01 <changelog-2014-01>`
-   :dox:`Changes in Magnum Plugins 2014.01 <changelog-plugins-2014-01>`
-   :dox:`Changes in Magnum Integration 2014.01 <changelog-integration-2014-01>`
